<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Preface</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface-1" epub:type="preface z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Preface</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Imitation of Horace<br/>
				<abbr>Ep.</abbr> 20.⁠—<abbr>B.</abbr> 1.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Methinks, oh! vain ill-judging book,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see thee cast a wishful look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where reputations won and lost are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In famous row called Paternoster.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Incensed to find your precious olio</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buried in unexplored portfolio,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You scorn the prudent lock and key,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pant well bound and gilt to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your volume in the window set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Stockdale, Hookham, or Debrett.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Go then, and pass that dangerous bourn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence never book can back return:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when you find, condemned, despised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neglected, blamed, and criticised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abuse from all who read you fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(If haply you be read at all)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorely will you your folly sigh at,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wish for me, and home, and quiet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Assuming now a conjuror’s office, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus on your future fortune prophesy:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon as your novelty is o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you are young and new no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In some dark dirty corner thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mouldy with damps, with cobwebs strown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your leaves shall be the bookworm’s prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sent to chandler-shop away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And doomed to suffer public scandal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall line the trunk, or wrap the candle!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But should you meet with approbation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And someone find an inclination</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ask, by natural transition</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Respecting me and my condition;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I am one, the enquirer teach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor very poor, nor very rich;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of passions strong, of hasty nature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of graceless form and dwarfish stature;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By few approved, and few approving;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Extreme in hating and in loving;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Abhorring all whom I dislike,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adoring who my fancy strike;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In forming judgements never long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for the most part judging wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In friendship firm, but still believing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others are treacherous and deceiving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thinking in the present aera</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That friendship is a pure chimaera:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More passionate no creature living,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud, obstinate, and unforgiving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet for those who kindness show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready through fire and smoke to go.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again, should it be asked your page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pray, what may be the author’s age?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your faults, no doubt, will make it clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I scarce have seen my twentieth year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which passed, kind reader, on my word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While England’s throne held George the Third.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now then your venturous course pursue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, my delight! Dear book, adieu!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">
					<abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. G. L.</abbr>
				</p>
				<p>Hague, <time datetime="1794-10-28"><abbr>Oct.</abbr> 28, 1794.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
